REGULATION (EC) No 852/2004 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
on the hygiene of foodstuffs

CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1 - Scope
This Regulation lays down general rules for food business operators on the hygiene of foodstuffs. It applies to all stages of production, processing and distribution of food.

Article 2 - Definitions
"Food hygiene" means the measures and conditions necessary to control hazards and to ensure fitness for human consumption of a foodstuff.
"Food business operator" means the natural or legal persons responsible for ensuring that the requirements of food law are met within the food business under their control.

Article 3 - General Obligation
Food business operators shall ensure that all stages of production, processing and distribution of food under their control satisfy the relevant hygiene requirements laid down in this Regulation.

Article 4 - General and Specific Hygiene Requirements
Food business operators carrying out primary production and associated operations shall comply with the general hygiene provisions laid down in Part A of Annex I.
Food business operators carrying out any stage of production, processing and distribution of food after primary production shall comply with the general hygiene requirements laid down in Annex II.

Article 5 - Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
Food business operators shall put in place, implement and maintain a permanent procedure or procedures based on the HACCP principles.

The HACCP principles consist of the following:
(a) identifying any hazards that must be prevented, eliminated or reduced to acceptable levels;
(b) identifying the critical control points at the step or steps at which control is essential;
(c) establishing critical limits at critical control points which separate acceptability from unacceptability;
(d) establishing and implementing effective monitoring procedures at critical control points;
(e) establishing corrective actions when monitoring indicates that a critical control point is not under control;
(f) establishing procedures to verify that the measures outlined in points (a) to (e) are working effectively;
(g) establishing documents and records commensurate with the nature and size of the food business.

When any modification is made in the product, process, or any step, food business operators shall review the procedure and make the necessary changes to it.

ANNEX II - GENERAL HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS

CHAPTER I - General Requirements for Food Premises
1. Food premises must be kept clean and maintained in good repair and condition.
2. The layout, design, construction, siting and size of food premises shall:
   (a) permit adequate maintenance, cleaning and/or disinfection;
   (b) be such as to protect against the accumulation of dirt, contact with toxic materials, the shedding of particles into food and the formation of condensation or undesirable mould on surfaces;
   (c) permit good food hygiene practices, including protection against contamination between and during operations.

3. An adequate number of flush lavatories must be available and connected to an effective drainage system. Lavatories must not lead directly into rooms in which food is handled.

4. An adequate number of washbasins must be available, suitably located and designated for cleaning hands. Washbasins must be provided with hot and cold running water, materials for cleaning hands and for hygienic drying.

5. There must be suitable and sufficient means of natural or mechanical ventilation.

6. Sanitary conveniences must have adequate natural or mechanical ventilation.

7. Food premises must have adequate natural and/or artificial lighting.

8. Drainage facilities must be adequate for the purpose intended.

9. Adequate changing facilities for personnel must be provided where necessary.

CHAPTER II - Specific Requirements in Rooms Where Foodstuffs are Prepared, Treated or Processed
1. Floor surfaces must be maintained in a sound condition and be easy to clean and, where necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of impervious, non-absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials.

2. Wall surfaces must be maintained in a sound condition and be easy to clean and, where necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of impervious, non-absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials and require a smooth surface up to a height appropriate for the operations.

3. Ceilings and overhead fixtures must be constructed and finished so as to prevent the accumulation of dirt and to reduce condensation, the growth of undesirable mould and the shedding of particles.

4. Windows and other openings must be constructed to prevent the accumulation of dirt. Those which can be opened to the outside environment must be fitted with insect-proof screens which can be easily removed for cleaning.

5. Doors must be easy to clean and, where necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of smooth and non-absorbent surfaces.

6. Surfaces (including surfaces of equipment) in areas where foods are handled, particularly those in contact with food, must be maintained in a sound condition and be easy to clean and, where necessary, to disinfect.

7. Adequate facilities must be provided for the cleaning, disinfecting and storage of working utensils and equipment. Such facilities must be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials, be easy to clean and have an adequate supply of hot and cold water.

8. Adequate provision must be made for any necessary washing of food. Every sink or other such facility provided for the washing of food must have an adequate supply of hot and/or cold potable water and be kept clean and, where necessary, disinfected.

CHAPTER III - Requirements for Movable and/or Temporary Premises
Premises and vending machines shall be so sited, designed, constructed and kept clean and maintained in good repair and condition as to avoid the risk of contamination, in particular by animals and pests.

CHAPTER IV - Transport
1. Conveyances and/or containers used for transporting foodstuffs must be kept clean and maintained in good repair and condition to protect foodstuffs from contamination.

2. Where conveyances and/or containers are used for transporting anything in addition to foodstuffs or for transporting different foodstuffs at the same time, there must be effective separation of products.

3. Bulk foodstuffs in liquid, granulate or powder form must be transported in conveyances and/or containers reserved for the transport of foodstuffs.

4. Where conveyances and/or containers have been used for transporting anything other than foodstuffs or for transporting different foodstuffs, there must be effective cleaning between loads.

5. Foodstuffs in conveyances and/or containers must be so placed and protected as to minimise the risk of contamination.

6. Where necessary, conveyances and/or containers used for transporting foodstuffs must be capable of maintaining foodstuffs at appropriate temperatures and allow those temperatures to be monitored.

CHAPTER V - Equipment Requirements
1. All articles, fittings and equipment with which food comes into contact must be effectively cleaned and, where necessary, disinfected.

2. They must be so constructed, be of such materials and be kept in such good order, repair and condition as to minimise any risk of contamination.

3. With the exception of non-returnable containers and packaging, all articles, fittings and equipment with which food comes into contact must be so constructed, be of such materials and be kept in such good order, repair and condition as to enable them to be kept clean and, where necessary, to be disinfected.

4. Where necessary, equipment must be fitted with any appropriate control device to guarantee the fulfilment of this Regulation's objectives.

5. Where chemical additives have to be used to prevent corrosion of equipment and containers, they must be used in accordance with good practice.

CHAPTER VI - Food Waste
1. Food waste, non-edible by-products and other refuse must be removed from rooms where food is present as quickly as possible.

2. Food waste, non-edible by-products and other refuse must be deposited in closable containers.

3. Adequate provision must be made for the storage and disposal of food waste, non-edible by-products and other refuse. Refuse stores must be designed and managed so as to enable them to be kept clean and free from animals and pests.

4. All waste must be eliminated in a hygienic and environmentally friendly way in accordance with applicable legislation and must not constitute a direct or indirect source of contamination.

CHAPTER VII - Water Supply
1. There must be an adequate supply of potable water.

2. Clean water may be used with whole fishery products. Clean seawater may be used with live bivalve molluscs, echinoderms, tunicates and marine gastropods.

3. Where non-potable water is used, for example for fire control, steam production, refrigeration and other similar purposes, it must circulate in a separate duly identified system. Non-potable water must not connect with, or allow reflux into, potable water systems.

4. Recycled water used in processing or as an ingredient must not present a risk of contamination. It must be of the same standard as potable water unless the competent authority is satisfied that the quality of the water cannot affect the wholesomeness of the foodstuff in its finished form.

5. Ice which comes into contact with food or which may contaminate food must be made from potable water. It must be made, handled and stored under conditions that protect it from contamination.

6. Steam used directly in contact with food must not contain any substance that presents a hazard to health or is likely to contaminate the food.

7. Where heat treatment is applied to foodstuffs in hermetically sealed containers, it must be ensured that water used to cool the containers after heat treatment is not a source of contamination.

CHAPTER VIII - Personal Hygiene
1. Every person working in a food-handling area must maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and must wear suitable, clean and, where necessary, protective clothing.

2. No person suffering from, or being a carrier of, a disease likely to be transmitted through food or afflicted with infected wounds, skin infections, sores or diarrhoea must be permitted to handle food or enter any food-handling area in any capacity if there is any likelihood of direct or indirect contamination. Any person so affected and employed in a food business and who is likely to come into contact with food must report immediately the illness or symptoms to the food business operator.

CHAPTER IX - Provisions Applicable to Foodstuffs
1. A food business operator must not accept raw materials or ingredients, other than live animals, or any other material used in processing products, if they are known to be, or might reasonably be expected to be, contaminated with parasites, pathogenic microorganisms or toxic, decomposed or foreign substances to such an extent that, even after the food business operator had hygienically applied normal sorting and/or preparatory or processing procedures, the final product would be unfit for human consumption.

2. Raw materials and all ingredients stored in a food business must be kept in appropriate conditions designed to prevent harmful deterioration and to protect them from contamination.

3. At all stages of production, processing and distribution, food must be protected against any contamination likely to render the food unfit for human consumption, injurious to health or contaminated in such a way that it would be unreasonable to expect it to be consumed in that state.

4. Adequate procedures must be in place to control pests. Adequate procedures must also be in place to prevent domestic animals from having access to places where food is prepared, handled or stored.

5. Raw materials, ingredients, intermediate products and finished products likely to support the reproduction of pathogenic micro-organisms or the formation of toxins must be kept at temperatures that would not result in a risk to health. The cold chain must not be interrupted. However, limited periods outside temperature control are permitted to accommodate the practicalities of handling during preparation, transport, storage, display and service of food, provided that it does not result in a risk to health.

6. Where foodstuffs are to be held or served at chilled temperatures they must be cooled as quickly as possible following the heat-processing stage, or final preparation stage if no heat process is applied, to a temperature which does not result in a risk to health.

7. The thawing of foodstuffs must be undertaken in such a way as to minimise the risk of growth of pathogenic microorganisms or the formation of toxins in the foods. During thawing, foods must be subjected to temperatures that would not result in a risk to health. Where run-off liquid from the thawing process may present a risk to health it must be adequately drained. Following thawing, food must be handled in such a manner as to minimise the risk of growth of pathogenic microorganisms or the formation of toxins.

8. Hazardous and/or inedible substances, including animal feed, must be adequately labelled and stored in separate and secure containers.

CHAPTER X - Provisions Applicable to the Wrapping and Packaging of Foodstuffs
1. Material used for wrapping and packaging must not be a source of contamination.

2. Wrapping materials must be stored in such a manner that they are not exposed to a risk of contamination.

3. Wrapping and packaging operations must be carried out so as to avoid contamination of the products. Where appropriate and in particular in the case of cans and glass jars, the integrity of the container's construction and its cleanliness must be assured.

4. Wrapping and packaging material re-used for foodstuffs must be easy to clean and, where necessary, to disinfect.

CHAPTER XI - Heat Treatment
The following requirements apply only to food placed on the market in hermetically sealed containers:
1. Any heat treatment process used to process an unprocessed product or to process further a processed product must raise every part of the product treated to a given temperature for a given period of time and prevent the product from being contaminated during the process.

2. To ensure that the process employed achieves the desired objectives, food business operators must regularly check the main relevant parameters (in particular temperature, pressure, sealing and microbiology), including by the use of automatic devices.

3. The process used should conform to an internationally recognised standard (for example, pasteurisation, ultra high temperature or sterilisation).

CHAPTER XII - Training
Food business operators must ensure:
1. That food handlers are supervised and instructed and/or trained in food hygiene matters commensurate with their work activity.

2. That those responsible for the development and maintenance of the procedure referred to in Article 5(1) of this Regulation, or for the operation of relevant guides, have received adequate training in the application of the HACCP principles.

3. Compliance with any requirements of national law concerning training programmes for persons working in certain food sectors.
